BLOG: Add bids-validator 2.0 announcement (#575)
bids-standard/bids-website: docs/blog/posts/bids-validator-2.0.md

`v1.10.0`, to find a snapshot of the schema at the time of that release.)

## The Schema Validator

The schema validator is now feature complete, validating file names,
JSON file fields and values, TSV file column names and values,
and various [checks] that have been written in the schema expression language.

To use the schema validator, visit <https://bids-standard.github.io/bids-validator/>
or download the [Deno] Javascript runtime and run:

```console
deno run -A jsr:@bids/validator [PATH]
```

While many features of the original BIDS validator have been preserved,
the structure of JSON configuration files and JSON outputs
(triggered by the `--json` flag) have changed their formats.
Advanced users may need to update their tooling on either end.

### New features

The schema validator includes features that were never implemented in the
legacy validator:

-   BIDS Derivatives (introduced in BIDS 1.4.0), including opt-in recursive
    validation of BIDS Derivatives datasets discovered in `derivatives/`
    subdirectories.

-   Support for BIDS-MRS (Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy), introduced in
    BIDS 1.10.0.

### Behavior changes

> -   The inheritance principle is consistently applied for all files.

Reviewer: should we add a link to the inheritance principle section of the doc?

-   Every JSON field or TSV column defined in BIDS is type-checked against the

>     same source that produces the tables in the specification.

Reviewer: I am not 100% sure what you mean. So I suspect I won't be the other one.
Can you give an example to disambiguate?

-   Extra metadata is no longer prohibited in sidecar JSON files, which was
    inconsistently applied across data types in the legacy validator.

-   All RECOMMENDED fields produce a warning if absent.

Some of these changes may not be to everyone's taste,
but we believe that consistent application of the specification is critical
to the utility of BIDS and the maintainability of the validator.
We hope that a consistent validator will help inform future changes to BIDS,

> so that the specification can become more true to the needs and preferences

Reviewer: ```suggestion
so that the specification can get closer to the needs and preferences
```
nitpick

regular expressions. At this point, the filename validation of the Python
validator matches that of the Deno (schema) validator.

#### v1.14.8

<figure>

```mermaid
graph LR;
    subgraph bids-specification;
        markdown ---> specification
        schema --> bidsschematools --> specification & schema.json
    end
    subgraph "bids-validator @ v1.14.8";
        regex["filename patterns"] --> Node.js
        Node.js --> web/legacy
        deno --> web
    end
    subgraph "python-validator > v1.14.7";
        python
    end

    specification -. interpreted .-> regex
    schema.json ---> deno
    bidsschematools ----> python
```

<caption>The Python validator was moved into its own repsitory.
Its versioning and development are no longer tied to the Javascript
validators.
</caption>
</figure>

After the release of v1.14.7, the Python validator was
removed from the [bids-standard/bids-validator] repository and
relocated to the [bids-standard/python-validator] repository.
Its development, if any takes place, will be independent of
the Javascript validator(s).
Its filename validation will be updated with new releases of [bidsschematools].

> The legacy validator was moved to <https://bids-standard.github.io/bids-validator/legacy/>.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The legacy validator was moved to <https://bids-standard.github.io/legacy-validator/>.
```
caught by the dead link thingy

Author: Ah, I actually wanted to keep that, since it was where we moved things at that time. I think we should instead add a redirect: bids-standard/bids-validator#108

Author: Fixed.
